On 16 January 1950, a suit was instituted by Gopal Singh Visharad before
the Civil Judge at Faizabad, describing himself as a Hindu devotee. He is a
resident of Ayodhya and follower of  ̳Santan Dharm‘. His grievance was that he
was being prevented by officials of the government from entering the inner
courtyard of the structure to offer worship. The plaintiff claims that he is entitled to
worship the deity of Lord Ram. The following reliefs were sought:
(i)
 A declaration of his entitlement to worship and seek the darshan of Lord
Ram, ―according to religion and custom‖ at the Janmabhumi temple
without hindrance; and
(ii)
 A permanent and perpetual injunction restraining defendants 1 to 10 from
removing the idols of the deity and other idols from the place where they
were installed; from closing the way leading to the idols; or interfering in
worship and darshan.
The cause of action for Suit 1 is stated to have arisen on 14 January 1950, when
the employees of the government are alleged to have unlawfully prevented the
plaintiff ―from going inside the place‖ and exercising his right of worship. It was
225
PART L
alleged that the ―State‖ adopted this action at the behest of the Muslim residents
represented by defendant nos 1 to 5, as a result of which the Hindus were stated
to been deprived of their ―legitimate right of worship‖. The plaintiff apprehended
that the idols, including the idol of Lord Ram, would be removed. These actions
were alleged to constitute a ―direct attack on the right and title of the plaintiff‖ and
was stated to be an ―oppressive act‖, contrary to law.
208. Denying the allegations contained in the plaint, the Muslim defendant nos
1 to 5 stated in their written statement that:
(i)
 The property in respect of which the case has been instituted is not
Janmabhumi but a mosque constructed by Babur. The mosque was built in
1528 on the instructions of Babur by Mir Baqi, who was the Commander of
his forces, following the conquest of the sub-continent by the Mughal
emperor;
(ii)
 The mosque was dedicated as a waqf for Muslims, who have a right to
worship there. Babur laid out annual grants for the maintenance and
expenditure of the mosque, which were continued and enhanced by the
Nawab of Awadh and the British Government;
(iii)
 The Suit of 1885 was a suit for declaration of ownership by Mahant
Raghubar Das only in respect of the Ramchabutra and hence, the claim
that the entire building represented the Janmasthan was baseless. As a
consequence of the dismissal of the suit on 24 December 1885, ―the case
respecting the Chabutra was not entertained‖;
(iv)
 The Chief Commissioner, Waqf appointed under the Muslim Waqf Act
1936 had held the mosque to be a Sunni Waqf;
226
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
PART L
Muslims have always been in possession of the mosque. This position
began in 1528 and continued thereafter, and consequently, ―Muslims are in
possession of that property... by way of an adverse possession‖;
Namaz had been offered at Babri Masjid until 16 December 1949 at which
point there were no idols under the central dome. If any person had placed
any idol inside the mosque with a mala fide intent, ―the degradation of the
mosque is evident and the accused persons are liable to be prosecuted‖;
Any attempt of the plaintiff or any other person to enter the mosque to offer
worship or for darshan would violate the law. Proceedings under Section
145 of the CrPC 1898 had been initiated; and
The present suit claiming Babri Masjid as the place of the Janmasthan is
without basis as there exists, for quite long, another temple with idols of
Lord Ram and others, which is the actual place of the Janmasthan of Lord
Ram.
A written statement was filed by defendant no 6, the State, submitting that:
(i)
 The property in suit known as Babri Masjid has been used as a mosque for
the purpose of worship by Muslims for a long period and has not been
used as a temple of Lord Ram;
(ii)
 On the night of 22 December 1949, the idols of Lord Ram were
surreptitiously placed inside the mosque imperilling public peace and
tranquillity. On 23 December 1949, the City Magistrate passed an order
under Section 144 of CrPC 1898 which was followed by an order of the
same date passed by the Additional City Magistrate under Section 145
227
(iii)
PART L
attaching the disputed property. These orders were passed to maintain
public peace; and
The City Magistrate appointed Shri Priya Datt Ram, Chairman, Municipal
Board, Faizabad-cum Ayodhya as a receiver of the property.
Similar written statements were filed by defendant no 8, the Additional City
Magistrate and defendant no 9, the Superintendent of Police.
Defendant no 10, the Sunni Central Waqf Board filed its written statement stating:
(i)
 The building in dispute is not the Janmasthan of Lord Ram and no idols
were ever installed in it;
(ii)
 The property in suit was a mosque known as the Babri mosque
constructed during the regime of Emperor Babur who had laid out annual
grants for its maintenance and expenditure and they were continued and
enhanced by the Nawab of Awadh and the British Government;
(iii)
 On the night of 22-23 December 1949, the idols were surreptitiously
brought into the mosque;
(iv)
 The Muslims alone had remained in possession of the mosque from 1528
up to 29 December 1949 when it was attached under Section 145. They
had regularly offered prayers up to 23 December 1949 and Friday prayers
up to 16 December 1949;
(v)
 The mosque had the character of a waqf and its ownership vested in God;
(vi)
 The plaintiff was estopped from claiming the mosque as the Janmabhumi
of Lord Ram as the claim in the Suit of 1885 instituted by Mahant
228
(vii)
PART L
Raghubar Das (described to be the plaintiff‘s predecessor) was confined
only to the Ramchabutra measuring seventeen feet by twenty one feet
outside the mosque; and
There already existed a Ram Janmasthan Mandir, a short distance away
from Babri Masjid.
In the plaintiff‘s replication to the written statement of defendant nos 1 to 5, it was
averred that the disputed site had never been used as a mosque since 1934. It
was further stated that it was ―common knowledge‖ that Hindus were in
continuous possession by virtue of which the claim of the defendants ceased.